## Solus 3

On some computers, I installed Solus 3, which is an independent Linux distribution. What we worked with last week is Elementary 0.4, which is based on Ubuntu 16.04. Solus is more lightweight than Elementary, and in my opinion, its desktop environment looks better.

However, Solus is a community project, while Ubuntu is sponsored by Canonical, a company which made more than 50 million of profit in the year of 2013. Because of this, Solus' software repository is considerably small, though it is enough for what we do.

Besides having an awesome desktop environment, the only difference you'll notice is that the command to manage packages is `eopkg` instead of `apt`.

# GOTTA INSTALL MCPSROOTCER

Or insecure curl

# Command line interface (CLI)

Many of the **advantages** of a command line interface (CLI) comes from the simple fact that they are easier to develop.

- Utilities are developed faster
- Fewer bugs
- More flexible

There are also improvements in speed compared to graphical user interfaces (GUI).

- GUI rendering wastes CPU time
- Mouse movement wastes your time (inherently slower than typing)

# Shell

The shell simply interprets user input and allows access to the operating system's services. `bash` is the most common shell on GNU/Linux. 

There are other shells such as `fish` and `zsh`, though for now we'll stick with `bash.`

Don't bother wasting time memorizing commands, not that anyone would want to do that anyway. They come naturally with continued use.

# Tips and tricks

`.` represents the current working directory, while `..` represents the parent directory. 

`*` represents a wild card. 

# Review

- `echo Hello world!`
- `ls DIR`
- `cd DIR`
- `mkdir DIR`
- `rmdir DIR`
- `rm FILE`
- `touch FILE`
- `cat`
    - `cat FILE`
    - `cat > FILE`
- `man COMMAND`
- `sudo COMMAND`
- `apt`

# Things to try 

`sudo apt install sl` or `sudo eopkg it sl`

`sl`

sl runs a steam locomotive in your terminal. 

`man sl`

`sl -alFc`


A Linux command usually follows this format: 

`command [--option -f] parameter`

A more advanced command goes like this: 

`VAR=something command [--option setting] [-f] parameter PIPE secondcommand`

A pipe redirects input and output of commands. 

1. `sudo apt install lolcat screenfetch` or `sudo eopkg it ruby screenfetch && gem install lolcat`
2. `man screenfetch`
3. `man lolcat`
4. `screenfetch | lolcat`

The vertical bar pipe directs the output of the first program to the input stream of the second program. 

The right angle braket, or greater than sign, dumps the output of a program to a text file. 

`cat > FILE`

# nano and vim 

text based editors 

`~/.*rc` files contain personal confiruations for the software you use. 

Edit `.bashrc` using `nano`:

```sh
export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/bin:
```

In bash, dollar sign represents a variable (`$VAR`).

The path is where the interpreter looks for binaries to run. Adding that line will allow any scripts in your home bin folder (`~/bin`) to be executed anywhere. 

Try this:

`cd ~/bin && wget --progress=bar https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jennydaman/twlinux/master/student_resources/woodo`

## some more sysadmin stuff

`systemd` is the `init` system of Linux which bootstraps the userspace and manages running services. Background processes are often refered to as "daemons". 

`systemd-analyze blame` lists all the services that started at boot, and how long they took.

`systemctl status SERVICE` reports the status of the service.

`systemctl disable --now SERVICE` prevents the service from starting on next boot, and tells the daemon to stop right now.

# System configuration 

Budgie users can change the desktop settings. 

Go fish, the friendly interactive shell. 
