---
layout: post
title: Week One brief
subtitle: Quick recap of UNIX and basic commands
---

Thanks for joining Linux Club! [Click here](/twlinux/about/) to see more information about the club itself.

# An introduction to Linux and Open Source

[Linux](https://www.linux.com/what-is-linux) is an open source kernel. Coupled with the [GNU](https://www.gnu.org/) software distribution, GNU/Linux is a powerful operating system that dominates the non-consumer computing market. Various distributions, or **"distros"**, of GNU/Linux are actively developed by both communities and for-profit companies. 

## Basic UNIX Concepts

GNU/Linux was originally designed to be an open source implementation of the proprietary UNIX operating system developed in 1970. 

What most people think of "folders" are referred to as directories.

- `/` represents the root directory. It contains important system files.

- `/home/` is where a user directories are located. A user's folder contains their documents, downloads, pictures, videos... etc. 

<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_philosophy>

The software design of UNIX aims to be minimalist and modular. As defined by Wikipedia, 

>"Modular programming is a software design technique that emphasizes separating the functionality of a program into independent, interchangeable modules, such that each contains everything necessary to execute only one aspect of the desired functionality." 

## Basic Linux shell commands

- `ls DIR` displays the contents of the directory `DIR`.

- `cd DIR` changes the current working directory to `DIR`.

- `touch FILE` creates a blank file called `FILE`.

- `cat` concatenates the input stream and prints to the output stream. (?)

    - `cat FILE` prints the content of `FILE`

    - `cat > FILE` will write the standard input stream out to `FILE`. End this command by pressing CTRL-D.

- `man COMMAND` shows the manual page for `COMMAND`.

- `sudo COMMAND` runs `COMMAND` with superuser (root) privileges. 

- `apt` is a front-end to the Debian package manager. 

    - `apt update` updates the package list.

    - `apt upgrade` updates the packages. 

    - `apt install PACKAGE0, PACKAGE1...` installs the packages listed. Must be ran as root.

    - `apt remove [--purge] PACKAGE0, PACKAGE1...` uninstalls the packages. With the optional parameter `--purge`, all configuration and data files are deleted as well.

    - `apt autoremove` removes all orphaned packages (unused dependencies).

    - `apt search KEYWORD` searches the repository for `KEYWORD`.

{: .box-note}
**Note:** Every apt subcommand listed above excluding search must be run as root. `sudo apt install...`

`CTRL-C` ususally cancels the foreground command by sending `SIGINT` or a `KeyboardInterrupt`.

### Weekly interesting thing

<https://publiccode.eu/>
