---
layout: post
title: Kali Linux
subtitle: Introduction to penetration testing
bigimg: /img/kali-dragon-middle.png
---

"Ethical hacking" describes the use of cybersecurity tools to promote "good".

Linux Club provides this content *for educational use only*. Please ask your victims politely before attempting to compromise their data or devices.

{: .box-error}
Attempting to gain unauthorized access to any computer system is **illegal**.

<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Penetration_test>

> A penetration test, colloquially known as a pen test, is an authorized simulated attack on a computer system that looks for security weaknesses, potentially gaining access to the system's features and data.

[**Kali Linux**](https://www.kali.org/) is the most popular Linux distro for advanced pennetration testing.

# Kill Chain

<http://www.lockheedmartin.com/us/what-we-do/aerospace-defense/cyber/cyber-kill-chain.html>

The kill chain describes your procedures and approach. In short, there are four phases of an attack.

1. **Reconnaissance**: collect information on your target.
    - **Passive** reconnaissance avoids direct contact with the system. Usually harder to detect. (ex. browsing the company's website)
    - **Active** reconnaissance is where the attacker engages with the target. High-risk and high-reward. (ex. social engineering, port scanning)
2. **Attack**: create and deploy your exploits.
3. **Objective**: you've infiltrated the target, now compromise the system.
4. **Report**: After a successful attack, propose solutions that can reduce the company's vulnerability.

## Best practices

### Avoid detection

- **Virtual machine**
    - *Virtualization* is a technology that allows computer resources to be dedicated to run a second operating system within a host.
    - Virtual machines can be deleted within seconds.
- **Live sessions**
    - Kali is often ran from USBs. All memory is erased simply by pulling out.
- **Network isolation**

Kali Linux should never be used as your primary workstation. You should be comfotable with the thought of immediately destroying any device with Kali installed.
