---
layout: post
title: Command Line Interface (CLI)
subtitle: Week 2 - basic Linux concepts and bash
bigimg: /img/turtle.jpg
---

From Wikipedia:

> A shell is a user interface for access to an operating system's services.

The most basic shell is `sh`.

`bash` is the most common shell for Linux. It has many more features and is easier to use than `sh`, and is nearly universal. There are other less common shells too, such as `fish` (Friendly Interactive SHell) and `zsh`.

# bash features

`*` represents a wild card.

Also know that `.` represents the current working directory, while `..` represents the parent directory.

Some basic commands were listed in [last week's post](/twlinux/2017-10-03-week-one/). A more comprehensive guide can be found here: <https://github.com/jennydaman/twlinux/wiki/Basic-UNIX-and-bash-commands>.

# Basic commands

- `echo Hello world!`

- `ls DIR` displays the contents of the directory `DIR`.

- `cd DIR` changes the current working directory to `DIR`.

- `mkdir DIR` creates a new directory.

- `rmdir DIR` deletes an empty directory. 

- `rm FILE` deletes a file. 

- `touch FILE` creates a blank file called `FILE`.

- `cat` concatenates the input stream and prints to the output stream. (?)

    - `cat FILE` prints the content of `FILE`

    - `cat > FILE` will write the standard input stream out to `FILE`. End this command by pressing CTRL-D.

- `man COMMAND` shows the manual page for `COMMAND`.

- `sudo COMMAND` runs `COMMAND` with superuser (root) privileges. 

- `apt` is a front-end to the Debian package manager. 

    - `apt update` updates the package list.

    - `apt upgrade` updates the packages. 

    - `apt install PACKAGE0, PACKAGE1...` installs the packages listed. Must be ran as root.

    - `apt remove [--purge] PACKAGE0, PACKAGE1...` uninstalls the packages. With the optional parameter `--purge`, all configuration and data files are deleted as well.

    - `apt autoremove` removes all orphaned packages (unused dependencies).

    - `apt search KEYWORD` searches the repository for `KEYWORD`.

{: .box-note}
**Note:** Every apt subcommand listed above excluding search must be run as root. `sudo apt install...`

`CTRL-C` ususally cancels the foreground command by sending `SIGINT` or a `KeyboardInterrupt`.

### Weekly interesting thing

<https://github.com/thiderman/doge>