---
layout: post
title: UNIX Systems Administration
subtitle: Week 4 - basic tasks and systemd
bigimg: /img/server_room.jpg
---

# Text mode editors

It is safer to use text-mode text editors and basic utilities to manipulate system files.

Set `SUDO_EDITOR` in your `.bashrc` file:

```sh
export SUDO_EDITOR=rnano
```

`nano` is an easy-to-understand text-mode text editor. (I actually recommend `vim` and `SUDO_EDITOR=rvim`, however `vim` is very advanced and is probably confusing.)

{: .box-note}
`rnano` and `rvim` launch the respective programs in *safe mode*, loading default configurations only and blocking scripts. This is a safety precaution for when making changes to the root folders.

## systemd

Systemd is the default [`init`](http://www.tldp.org/LDP/intro-linux/html/sect_04_02.html) solution to many modern Linux distros. It manages daemons (background services).

`systemd-analyze blame` reports the services that started at boot, in descending order of CPU time.

`systemctl disable --now [SERVICE]` ends a daemon and stops it from starting on boot.

{: .box-warning}
Disabling unnecessary services can improve security by minimizing your attack surface. Disabling a crutucal system service can cause serious issues (though it's usually easy to fix).

Other subcommands: `systemctl status|start|stop|restart [SERVICE]`

More commands: <https://github.com/jennydaman/twlinux/wiki/Basic-UNIX-and-bash-commands#unix-system-administration>

## The Freedesktop Specification

The desktop environment (DE) reads `.desktop` files for metadata and launch configurations for desktop applications. The package manager installs these files to `/usr/share/applications/`.

{: .box-error}
Changing files owned by the package manager is dangerous, changes are overwritten by software upgrades.

User overrides to the `.desktop` files and custom launches can be made in `~/.local/share/applications`.

## Static HTTP file servers

Comes preinstalled on most Linux distros:

```sh
python3 -m http.server
``` 

Youi'll need to know your private IP address: `ip addr show`

Alternatively, you can use `http-server` (based on node.js)

Install `npm` from your distro's repositories, then install `http-server`: `npm install -g http-server`

```sh
http-server
```
